# 2.2 Trees

A tree is a connected graph with no cycles. A graph is a tree if and only if
there is exactly one unique path between every pair of vertices. This is proven
in four parts. One must prove both implications and prove the existence and
uniqueness of paths for each implications. A forest is a graph with no cycle. A
graph is a forest if nad only if there is at most one unique path between every
pair of vertices.

A tree with at least 2 vertices has at least 2 leaves (vertices of degree 1).

A tree with $v$ vertices must have $e = v - 1$ edges.

## Spanning Trees

A spanning tree is a subgraph that contains all the vertices and is a tree.
Every connected graph has a spanning tree. To get a spanning tree remove one
edge from any cycle in the graph until there are no more cycles in the graph or
add edges that would not create a cycle.

A minimum spanning tree minimizes the combined weight of tree (the combination
of the weight/cost of the edges). The algorithms are similar except they remove
the edge with the largest weight or add the edge with the lowest weight.

## Rooted Trees

A rooted tree is a normal tree with a little bit of added structure to it. A
rooted tree has one vertex that is designated as the root and the other vertices
can be identified by their position relative to the root.

If two vertices are adjacent, the one closer to the root is the parent and the
other is the child. The root is a parent and doesn't have any parents itself
while the other vertices all have exactly one parent. A vertex $v$ is a
descendent of a vertex $u$, $u$ is on the path from the root to $v$. $u$ is
called an ancestor of $v$. If vertices are not descendants of one another they
are siblings or cousins. Siblings are vertices that have the same parent.

# Additional Exercises

1.

a. not a tree
b. tree
c. tree
d. not a tree

2.

a. must be a tree
b. cannot be a tree
c. could be a tree
d. cannot be a tree

3. 

a. cannot be a tree
b. could be a tree
c. cannot be a tree
d. must be a tree

4. 

Assume you have a graph with $v$ vertices and $e$ edges where $v = e + 1$. The
simple counter example is the graph with vertices $V = {a, b, c, d, e}$ and
vertices $E = {{a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c}, {d, e}}$. There are 5 vertices and 4
edges so this graph satisfies the condition but it is not a tree because there
is no way to reach $d$ from $a$.

5.

Assume there is a graph with $v$ vertices and $e$ edges where $v > e + 1$ and
the graph is connected. The spanning tree of this graph will therefore have
fewer than $e$ edges because the algorithm for finding the spanning tree
removed edges. The number of vertices in the spanning tree $v$ is greater than
the number of edges + 1. Therefore the spanning tree is not a tree, which
contradicts the statement that it is a spanning tree.

6.

Assume there is a graph $G$ with $v$ vertices and $e$ edges where $v < e + 1$.
The spanning tree that covers this graph is found by removing edges that are
part of cycles. The number of vertices in a spanning graph must be one more than
the number of edges, so the spanning tree must have fewer edges than $G$. That
means that edges must have been removed from cycles, so $G$ has cycles.

7.

The name forest is appropriate because a forest is a collection of different
trees. A forest could be split into multiple trees trough the following steps:

   1. Pick a vertex, and remove it and all the vertices that are connected to
      it, this creates a tree.
   2. Return to step 1 if there is atleast one other vertex in the forest.

A forest consititing of $m$ trees and $v$ vertices must have $v$ - $m$ edges
because each tree has 1 less edge than vertices and there are $m$ trees.

The same proof from 6 applies as I did not assume that the graph is connected.

8. 

Assume there is more than one path between a pair of vertices. There is a cycle
in this graph because there are 2 unique ways to get from a vertex to another.
Therefore the graph is not a forest.

Assume a graph is not a forest. This means that there are cycles somewhere in
this graph. Between any 2 vertices in a cycle in the graph, there are at least 2
paths between them.

9.

10.

