# 2.5 Coloring Vertices

Vertex coloring is the process of assigning each vertex a color. The coloring is
proper if each vertex has a different color from each of it's neighbors. The
smallest number of colors needed to properly color a graph is the graph's
chromatic number ($\chi$).

$K_n$ always has a chromatic number of $n$. Bipartite graphs always have a
chromatic number of 2

## The Four Color Theorem

Every planar graph (map) has a chromatic number less than or equal to 4.

### Example 2.5.1

1. 6
2. 3
3. 2

### Example 2.5.3

5

There is no efficient known algorithm to calculate the chromatic number. 

The chromatic number of a graph is greater than or equal to the clique number of
the graph. A clique is a set of vertices in a graph that are all connect, an
induced subgraph of a complete graph. The clique number is the number of
vertices in the largest clique. A graph is perfect if the chromatic number is
equal to the clique number.

## Brooks' theorem

The chromatic number of any graph is less than or equal to the largest degree
unless the graph is complete or it is an odd cycle.

# Coloring Edges

The chromatic index of a graph ($\chi'$) is the largest number of colors needed
to color all the edges of a graph so that none of the edges connected to a
vertex have the same color.

### Example 2.5.6

5 hours

## Vizing's Theorem

The chromatic index of a graph is the degree ($\Delta (G)$) (class 1) or $\Delta
(G) + 1$ (class 2)

Bipartite graphs are always class 1. All planar graphs with degree greater than
or equal 7 are class 1

## Ramsey Theory

Can the edges of a graph be colored either red or blue so that there is no all
red or all blue triangle? This question can be expanded to more colors or
instead of a triangle ($K_3$) it is any complete graph.
