# 2.6 Relations and Graphs

Graphs can be used to represent relations. For example the relation between
classes and the students in those classes. The vertices would be the students
and the classes and the edges would connect students to classes they were in.
The graph would be bipartite. 

The cartesian product ($X$) of two sets is the set of all ordered pairs from the
two sets. This could be represented as a directed bipartite graph.

$$
A x B = {(a, b) : a \in A, b \in B}
$$

A binary relation is a set of ordered pairs. A binary relation is a relation
between two sets so that the ordered pairs that make up the relation have an
element from both sets. A binary relation on sets $A$ and $B$ is a subset of $A
x B$.

The inverse of a binary relation is $R^-1 = {(b, a): (a, b) \in R}$

If $R$ is a relation from $A$ to $B$ and $S$ is a relation from $B$ to $C$ the
composition of $R$ and $S$ is

$$
S \circ R = {(a, c) \in A x C : (a, b) \in R and (b,c) in S for some b \in B}
$$

Composing the inverse and the original function ($T^-1 \circ T$) gives the
identity function

### Example 2.6.3

$T = {(Al, Calculus), (Bob, Calculus), (Cat, Calculus), (Eva, Calculus), (Bob,
Discrete), (Eva, Discrete), (Al, Statistics), (Cat, Statistics), (Dirk,
Statistics)}$

### Example 2.6.4

${{6, 6}, {6, 3}, {6, 2}, {6, 1}, {5, 5}, {5, 1}, {4, 2}, {4, 1}, {3, 1}, {2,
1}, {1, 1}}$

### Example 2.6.7

$T = {(Al, Prof X), (Bob, Prof X), (Cat, Prof X), (Eva, Prof X), (Bob, Prof L),
(Eva, Prof L), (Dirk, Prof X), (Al, Prof S), (Cat, Prof S), (Dirk, Prof S)}$

### Example 2.6.8

The relation gives all pairs of students that share a class with each other.

## Properties of Relations

A relation ($R$) is reflexive on the set $A$ if $(a, a) \in R$ for all $a \in
A$. A relation is symmetric if for all $a, b \in A$ if $(a, b) \in R$ then $(b,
a) \in R$. A relation is transitive if for all $a, b, c \in A$ if $(a,b) \in R$
and $(b, c) \in R$ then $(a, c) \in R$.

If no element is related to itself then the relation is irreflexive. If the only
time both $(a, b)$ and $(b, a)$ are both in $R$ is when $a = b$, a relation is
antisymmetric. A relation is symmetric if and only if the inverse of the
relation is the same.

## Equivalence Relations

Relations that are reflexive, symmetric, and transitive are equivalence
relations.

Partial order relations are reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive. $\le$ and
$\subseteq$ are examples.

### Example 2.6.15

Assume $a$ is an integer. $a - a = 0$ and 0 is even. Therefore $\equiv_2$ is
reflexive.

Assume $a$ and $b$ are integers and $a - b = 2k$. This expression can be
multiplied by $-1$ to form $b - a = -2k$ where $-k$ is an integer. Therefore
$\equiv_2$ is symmetric.

Assume $a$, $b$, and $c$ are integers, $a - b = 2k$, and $b - c = 2j$. Combining
these statements algebraically gets $a - c = 2(k+j)$ where $k+j$ is an integer.
Therefore $\equiv_2$ is transitive.

### Example 2.6.16

It is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive so yes.

## Equivalence Classes and Partitions

Let $R$ be a relation on the set $A$ where $a$ is in $A$. The relation class of
$a$, $[a]$ is the set of all elements $b$ such that $(a, b) \in R$. The class is
called an equivalence class if $R$ is an equivalence relation.

### Example 2.6.18

$[1]={1}$
$[2]={1, 2}$
$[3]={1, 3}$
$[4]={1, 2, 4}$
$[5]={1, 5}$
$[6]={1, 2, 3, 6}$

### Example 2.6.19

The equivalence class for an integer for the relation is the set of all integers
that have the same parity. There are only two equivalence classes, one for odd
one for even.

Elements of an equivalence relation are only a part of one equivalence class.
The classes form a partition.

A partition of a non-empty set $A$ is a set of non-empty subsets $P$ so that every
element of $A$ is in exactly one element of $P$

### Theorem

The equivalence classes of an equivalence relation form a partition.

The relation of elements that belong to the same block of a partition is an
equivalence relation.

The equivalence classes of an equivalence relation formed by a partition is the
exact same as the original partition. The equivalence relation formed by a
partition that was formed by an equivalence relation is the exact same as the
original relation.
