# 3.1 Pascal's Triangle

Pascal's triangle is made by adding the two numbers above to generate the number
below. Any item in pascal's triangle can be identified by two numbers. The top
number is the row and bottom number is the column. Each are counted starting
from 0. It can also be said as "n choose k" where n is the row and k is the
column.

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
k
\end{pmatrix}
$$

# Lattice Paths

An integer lattice is the set of all points in rectangular coordinates where the
coordinates are integers. A lattice path is one of the shortest possible paths
going between two points while staying on the integer lattice. The path can not
have both up and down or both left and right it can only have at most one of
each. The length of the paths is always the same.

The number of lattice paths between the points $(0, 0)$ and $(m, n)$ are the
number of paths to $(m - 1, n)$ plus the number of paths to $(m, n - 1)$ which
is how pascals triangle is generated.

The row of the triangle is the length of the path and the column is the number
of steps in y (or x, the answer doesn't change). So the number of paths from
above would be $m + n$ choose $m$.

Out of $m + n$ movements, choose $m$ (or $n$) of them to be in the $x$ (or $y$)
direction.

$$
\begin{pmatrix}
m + n \\
m
\end{pmatrix}
$$

### Example 3.1.2

330

# Bit Strings

A bit string is a string of binary digits. The length is the number of bits. The
weight is the number of 1s.

$B^n_k$ is the set of all $n$ bit strings with a weight of $k$. The cardinality
of a set is the length so $|B^n_k|$ is the number of $n$ bit string with a
weight of $k$.

The route a lattice path takes can be represented as a bit string where each
step in the x direction is a 1 and each step in the y direction is a 0 (or the
opposite). This means the the cardinality of $|B^n_k|$ is "$n$ choose $k$".

Out of of $n$ characters, choose $k$ to be 1.

### Example 3.1.4

462

# Subsets and Pizzas

A bit string can correspond to a subset. The length of the bit string is the
length of the super set and the weight of the bit string is the length of the
subset. A 1 in the bit string means that the subset contains the corresponding
element in the super set. This is a bijection (a one to one mapping) from bit
strings to subsets.

The number of $k$ element subsets of a set with $n$ elements is "n choose k".

This can give the number of unique pizzas that can be ordered with $k$ toppings
out of $n$ total possible toppings.

### Example 3.1.5

${1, 3, 5, 6}$
${3}$
${1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}$
${}$

### Example 3.1.7

35

# Algebra

Pascals triangle can be used to expand binomial multiplication. When expanding
$(x+y)^3$, each term will have 3 items multiplied together (eg. the first term,
$x^3$ has $x$ three times). Finding the coefficient is finding the number of ways
to get a sequence of how ever many x and y when expanding.

## Binomial Theorem

$$
(x+y)^n=\binom{n}{0}x^n + \binom{n}{1}x^{n-1}y+\cdots+\binom{n}{n - 1}xy^{n-1} + \binom{n}{n}y^n
$$
