# 3.2 Combining Outcomes

Counting problems can be framed as asking how many different outcomes are there
of an event.

The easiest way to count the outcomes of an event is just writing them all and
literally counting the list.

If you combine the set of outcomes for 2 events the number of outcomes is the
length of the sets added together. For example you have 5 squares and 5 spheres.
If you pick either a square or a sphere there are 10 outcomes. If you combine
the outcomes so you pick one square and one sphere then you should multiply the
number of outcomes together to get the new total number.

### Example 3.2.1

The brother is combining the sets of the outcomes, and the sister is combining
the outcomes in the sets.

## Sum Principle

If an event $A$ has $m$ outcomes, and $B$ has $n$ disjoint (completely
unrelated) outcomes, then the event $A$ or $B$ has $m + n$ outcomes. This can be
repeated as many times as you want to add many events together.

### Example 3.2.3

52

### Example 3.2.4

98

### Example 3.2.5

203

### Example 3.2.6

130

## Product Principle

If an event $A$ has $m$ outcomes and each outcome of $A$ results in $n$
different outcomes for an event $B$ then the event $A$ and $B$ has $m * n$
outcomes. If you have lots of the same (but disjoint) events you can use
exponents.

### Example 3.2.8

130

### Example 3.2.9

27720

### Example 3.2.10

17576000 ($26^3 * 10^3$)

### Example 3.2.11

35831808 ($12^7$)

### Example 3.2.12

1024 ($2^10$)

This is like asking 10 yes or no questions if you want the topping on your pizza.

### Example 3.2.13

1024 ($4^5$)

## Combining Them

If you wanted to know the number of ways you could select two cards from a deck
where the first card was red and the second card was a face card you couldn't
simply multiply the outcomes because the events are not disjoint. This can be
solved by splitting up the outcomes. When picking the first card, there are 20
ways you can pick a red non face card, and for each of those outcomes, there are
12 ways to pick a face card, so the number of outcomes for this part is $20 *
12$. There are $6$ ways to pick a red face card for the first event, and for
each of those outcomes, there are $11$ ways to pick a face card the next card.
This means there are $20 * 12 + 6 * 11$ total outcomes.* 12 + 6 * 11$ total
outcomes.* 12 + 6 * 11$ total outcomes.* 12 + 6 * 11$ total outcomes.* 12 + 6 *
11$ total outcomes.* 12 + 6 * 11$ total outcomes.* 12 + 6 * 11$ total outcomes.*
12 + 6 * 11$ total outcomes.

### Example 3.2.14

6720

### Example 3.2.15

13
