# 3.3 Non-Disjoint Outcomes

At least 33 people enjoy at least one kind of pie. The answer is not 95 because
adding them all up means you are double counting people that like multiple kinds
of pie.

Another way to express combining events when you are picking an outcome from one
event or another is through sets. Let $A$ and $B$ be the set of outcomes of the
first and second set, respectively. The number of outcomes of $A$ or $B$ is $A
\cup B$. The sum rule works where $A$ and $B$ have no elements in common. To
count the number of outcomes, find the cardinality (size) of the union.

### Sum Principle Written as a Set

if $A \cap B = \emptyset$, then

$$
|A \cup B| = |A| + |B|
$$

otherwise (although this also works for the above case)

$$
|A \cup B| = |A| + |B| - |A \cap B|
$$

### Example 3.3.2

$$
\binom{5}{2} + \binom{5}{4} - \binom{3}{2} = 12
$$

### Example 3.3.3

15

### Cardinality of a Union (3 Sets)

$$
|A \cup B \cup C| = |A| + |B| + |C| - |A \cap B| - |A \cap C| - |B \cap C| + |A \cap B \cap C|
$$

### Example 3.3.7

$$
25 + 16 + 10 - 8 - 5 - 3 + 1 = 36
$$

### Principle on Inclusion/Exclusion

The cardinality of a union of any number of sets can be found by following the
pattern in the 2 given solutions. Alternating back and forth from adding and
subtracting.

## Overlaps in the Product Principle

The product principle doesn't care if sets of outcomes are disjoint or
independent. The product principle only cares that the number of outcomes for
the second event is the same no matter the outcome of the first event.

### Example 3.3.8

1. 17576
2. 15600

### Example 3.3.9

The product principle doesn't work here because the number of letters you could
choose after each event changes based on the letter selected previously. This
means the product principle doesn't work because the number of outcomes of the
second and third events is not always the same.

### Example 8

We want to build 12 letter "words" using only the first $n = 7$ letters of the
alphabet. For example, if $n = 5$ we can use the first 5 letters, $\{a, b, c, d,
e\}$ (Recall, words are just strings of letters, not necessarily actual English
words.)

#### a

How many of these words are there total?

You are picking from 7 letters 12 times so there are $7^{12}$ words total. You can
repeat letters so there is no extra work that needs to be done related to that.

#### b

How many of these words contain no repeated letters?

Because there are 7 different letters and 12 spots to put those letters in, by
the pigeon hole principle, multiple spots must be assigned to the same letter,
so there is no possible word without repeated letters.

#### c

How many of these words start with the sub-word "ade"?

$7^{12-3}$ because you can find all the words by finding all the words with
$12 - 3 = 9$ letters and adding "ade" to the beginning.

#### d

How many of these words either start with "ade" or end with "be" or both?

$7^{12-3} + 7^{12-2} - 7^{12-3-2}$ because there are $7^{12-3}$ words that start
with "ade" as explained above and $7^{12-2}$ words that end with "be". You then
must subtract the intersection to avoid double counting words that start with
"ade" and end with "be". There are $7^{12-3-2}$ words that match this because
you are finding all the possible $12 - 3 - 2 = 7$ letter long words then adding
"ade" to the start and "be" to the end.

#### e

How many of the words containing no repeats also do not contain the sub-word
"bed"?

$0$. There are no words that contain no repeats, so adding an extra condition doesn't
change that.
