# 3.5 Counting Multisets

A mulitset is a set where an item can appear multiple times. The number of times
an item appears in a multiset is called its multiplicity. 

How many ways are there to give 7 cookies to 4 kids. You could represent this as
a list of the number of cookies each person receives. For example, $3112$ where
the first kids gets 3, the second and third get 1, and the fourth gets 2. The
sum of the numbers must be 7. It could also be represented as a string of 7
letters where each letter represents which kid gets the cookie. The same
scenario could be represented by "AAABCDD". The order of the letters doesn't
matter. This is a multiset.

### Example 3.5.2

$$
{{ A, A, B, B, C, C, D, D, E, F }} = 222211
$$

$$
{{ A, B, B, C, C, D, D, E, F, F }} = 122212
$$

$$
{{ A, B, C, C, C, C, D, E, F, F }} = 114112
$$

Questions about counting multisets could also be phrased as counting the number
of equations that satisfy

$$
a + b + c + d + e = 12
$$

## Representing Multisets with Bit Strings

The multiset ${{A, A, A, B, C, D, D}}$ can also be represented as $3,1,1,2$ or
$111,1,1,11$ where the number of ones is the multiplicity of that item. This is
easier to read with the following notation (called sticks and stones):

$$
\circ \circ \circ | \circ | \circ | \circ \circ
$$

The $\circ$s represent 0s and the $|$s represent 1s and the number of
combinations is equal to the number of combinations of the equivalent bit
string.

### Example 3.5.4

$$
\binom{15}{9}
$$

### Example 3.5.5

$$
\binom{16}{9}
$$

### Example 3.5.6

13 stones, 4 sticks

$$
\binom{13+4}{4}
$$

8 stones, 4 sticks

$$
\binom{8+4}{4}
$$

3 stones, 4 sticks

$$
\binom{3+4}{4}
$$

# Example 6

> Your friend tells you she has 11 coins in her hand (just pennies, nickels,
> dimes, and quarters). If you guess how many of each kind of coin she has, she
> will give them to you. If you guess randomly, what is the probability that you
> will be correct?

You are effectively assigning each of the 11 coins (the 11 stones) into 4 types
of coins (so 3 sticks). The number of possible outcomes is $\binom{11+3}{3}$
because you can represent the positions of the sticks as a bit string with a
length of $11 + 3$ with $3$ ones, which are the 3 stick. If you pick an outcome
at random, there is a $\frac{1}{\binom{11+3}{3}}$ chance of picking the correct
outcome.

$$
\frac{1}{\binom{11+3}{3}} = \frac{1}{364} = 0.00275
$$
