# 1.1 Mathematical Statements

## Argument

- Consists of premises and a conclusion
- Valid if the conclusion must be true when the premises are all true
- Invalid if the conclusion can be false when the premises are all true
- Sound if valid and all premises are true
- A proof of a statement is a sound argument whose conclusion is the statement

## Statement

A statement is a declaration that is either true or false.

Atomic statements cannot be divided into smaller parts while molecular ones can.

## Logical Connectives

Connects statements (atomic or molecular) together into molecular statements.

| Name | Symbol | Read as |
|---|---|---|
| conjunction | $\land$ | and |
| disjunction | $\lor$ | or |
| implication or conditional | $\rightarrow$ | if then |
| biconditional | $\leftrightarrow$ | if and only if |
| negation | $\lnot$ | not |

### Binary Connectives

Connect two statements

### Unary Connectives

Only applies to one statement

The truth value of a molecular statement isn't determined by the contents of the
inner statements only their truth values and the connectives used.

**Propositional variables** - (aka sentential variables) capital letters from
the middle of the alphabet that stand in for statements.

$P\rightarrow Q$ is true when $P$ is false or $Q$ is true

$P\leftrightarrow Q$ is true when $P$ is the same as $Q$

or is inclusive

|  $P$  |  $Q$  |  $P \land Q$  |  $P \lor Q$  |  $P \rightarrow Q$  |  $P \leftrightarrow Q$  |  $\lnot P$  |
|-----|-----|-----------|----------|----------|-----------|------|
|  1  |  1  |     1     |    1     |    1     |     1     |  0   |
|  1  |  0  |     0     |    1     |    0     |     0     |  0   |
|  0  |  1  |     0     |    1     |    1     |     0     |  1   |
|  0  |  0  |     0     |    0     |    1     |     1     |  1   |

## Predicates and Quantifiers

A predicate is a statement with a free variable. The free variable is
substituted with a real statement to  turn the predicate into a statement. They
are written as functions.

### Quantifiers

| Name | Symbol | Meaning |
|---|---|--|
| universal quantifier | $\forall$ | for all |
| existential quantifier | $\exists$ | there exists or for some |

if the predicate $P(x)$ is true if $x$ is prime, then $\forall x P(x)$ claims
that all numbers are prime (which is false) and $\exists x P(x)$ claims that
there is at least one prime number (which is true)

**Domain of discourse** - what "for all" means, all of what. Usually all natural
numbers in this class

### Going from natural language to mathematical notation

| Natural Language | Mathematical Notation | Set equivalent |
|---|---|---|
| every P-thing is a Q-thing | $\forall x (P(x) \rightarrow Q(x))$ | subset |
| some P-things are Q-things | $\exists x (P(x) \land Q(x))$ | intersection |

### Implicit Quantifiers

If a sentence with predicates assume that the predicates are statements where
the variables are universally quantified. The quantified statement is called the
*universal generalization*.

## Exercises

### 1.1.10

1. True
2. False
3. True
4. True
5. True
6. True
7. True
8. True

### 1.1.11

1. 4 is prime and 5 is prime
2. (4 is prime $\lor$ 5 is prime) $\land$ $\lnot$ (4 is prime $\land$ 5 is
   prime)
3. passed the class $\rightarrow$ (did the homework $\land$ attended every day)
4. is even $\lor$ is odd

### 1.1.13

$E(x)$ is true if $x$ is even. $O(x)$ is true if $x$ is odd.

$$
\forall x (E(x) \land O(x))
$$

### Additional Exercises

1.
    1. $P \land Q$
    2. $P \rightarrow \lnot Q$
    3. jack or jill passed math
    4. if both didn't pass math then jill passed math
    5.
        1. cannot conclude anything
        2. jack did not pass math
2.
    1. $\forall x (\lnot(E(x) \land O(x)))$
    2. $\forall x (E(2x) \land O(2x + 1))$
    3. $\exists x (P(x) \land E(x))$
    4. $\forall x \forall y \exists z (x > y \rightarrow x > z > y)$
    5. $\lnot(\forall x \exists y(x + 1 > y > x))$
3.
    1. true for all real numbers greater than 0. False for all real numbers
    2. true for all real numbers. False for all natural numbers
    3. true when domain of y is { 1, 2, 3 }, domain of x is { 4, 5, 6 }, and
       domain of z is { 7, 8, 9 }. False for all natural numbers
