# 1.2 Implications

Timmy doesn't have a right to be upset because the statement, "If you don't eat
all your broccoli, then you will not get any ice cream," doesn't say anything
about if Timmy get ice cream if he does eat all his broccoli.

Almost all math claims are implications because theorems are only true if
certain preconditions are met. For example if $a$, $b$, and $c$ are the two side
lengths and hypotenuse length of a triangle, then $a^2 + b^2 = c^2$.

Statements like "every square is a rectangle" is actually the implication "if
something is a square, then it is a rectangle"

| $P$ | $Q$ | $P \rightarrow Q$ |
|---|---|---|
| T | T | T |
| T | F | F |
| F | T | T |
| F | F | T |

An implication doesn't mean something caused something else, although that might
be true.

### Example 1.2.3

You are only a liar if Bob gets a 90 on the final and fails

### Example 1.2.4

1. true
2. true
3. true
4. true

### Example 1.2.5

The statement "For all shapes, if the shape is a square, then it is a
rectangle." is true because all squares are also rectangles.

## Related Statements

Given $P \rightarrow Q$, the converse is $Q \rightarrow P$, the contrapositive
is $\lnot Q \rightarrow \lnot P$, and the inverse is $\lnot P \rightarrow \lnot
Q$. The inverse is just the contrapositive of the converse or the converse of
the contrapositive. The outer qualifiers do not change when finding any of these
related statements. The inverse and the converse of a true statement is not
always true, but the contrapositive is always true.

If a statement and it's converse are both true, you could say the atomic
statements are equivalent and write it is $P \leftrightarrow Q$ (biconditional).
This is said as "If and only if"

- "$P$ is necessary for $Q$" means $Q \rightarrow P$
- "$P$ is sufficient for $Q$" means $P \rightarrow Q$
- "$P$ is necessary and sufficient for $Q$" means $P \leftrightarrow Q$

### Example 1.2.7

- Converse: if you go to the party, then you cleaned your room
- Contrapositive: if you didn't go to the party, then you didn't clean your room
- Inverse: if you don't clean your room, then you can't go to the party

### Example 1.2.9

The first statemement is true, but it's converse is not.

### Example 1.2.10

1. Then Susie gets an A
2. Nothing
3. Nothing
4. Then susie did not get a 93% on the final

### Example 1.2.12

- If I dream, then I am asleep
- I am asleep if I dream
- If I am not asleep, then I am not dreaming
- I am not dreaming, if I am not asleep

- If I am asleep, then I dream
- I dream if I am asleep
- If I am not dreaming, then I am not asleep
- I am not asleep, if I am not dreaming

### Example 1.2.14

Having a spade is sufficient to have a black card, or having a black card is
necessary to have a spade.

If the circle is orange then the square is purple. If the square is purple, the
circle is orange is false

# Additional Exercises

1.
    1. E of any number is sufficient to know that E of that number plus two is
    true
    2. For every number, the sine of that number equals a number
    3. For every number, that number equals the sine of another number
    4. For every pair of numbers, if those numbers cubed are equal, then the
    numbers are equal
2.
    1. If Oscar drinks milk, then he eats Chinese food
    2. If Oscar doesn't drink milk, then he doesn't eat Chinese food
    3. The contrapositive could be false if Oscar didn't drink milk but ate
       Chinese food. This would mean the original statement is false
    4. You cannot conclude anything about him eating Chinese food if he drank
       milk because the only way you could conclude something about him eating
       Chinese food would be if he didn't drink milk.
    5. If Oscar didn't drink milk the statement is true only if he didn't eat
       Chinese food. This is because it would mean the first statement doesn't
       actually imply the second.
3. 
    1. If you lose weight, then you exercised
    2. If you exercise, then you lose weight
    3. If someone is American, then they are patriotic
    4. If you are patriotic, then you are American
    5. If a number is rational, then it is real
    6. If a number is not even, then it is prime
    7. If the Broncos play in the super bowl, then they will win
4.
    - You can watch TV if you clean your room
    - If you don't watch TV, you didn't clean your room
    - cleaning your room is sufficient to watch TV
    - not cleaning you rroom is necessary if you don't watch TV

    - You can clean your room if you watch TV
    - If you don't clean your room, you didn't watch TV
    - watching TV is sufficient to cleaning your room
    - not watching TV is necessary if you don't clean your room
5.
    - if a function is differentiable at a point is is necessary that is
      continuous at that point
    - being continuous at a point is not sufficient to be differentiable at that
      point
6. 
    1. converse: if any natural number is solitary, it is prime. contrapositive:
       if any natural number is not solitary, it is not prime.
    2. there is a prime natural number that is not solitary. This could be
       proven by finding at least one prime natural number that is not solitary.
    3. The statement is true because an implication is always true if the first
       statement is not false and 10 is not prime.
    4. This doesn't tell us anything about the original statement but it proves
       that the converse is false. The original is true because 8 is not prime so
       the implication must be true. The converse is false because 8 is solitary
       but not prime.
    5. The set of prime numbers is a subset of the set of solitary numbers
       because every prime number is a solitary number but every solitary number
       might not be a prime number.
