# 1.3 Rules of Logic

## Investigate

### Rules

- either green vest or red shoes
- purple shirt and green vest implies no bowtie
- green vest implies purple shirt or red shoes
- red shoes implies purple shirt

He is wearing a bowtie

This means:

- he isn't wearing a purple shirt and a green vest
- if he's wearing green vest, he is wearing a purple shirt, and he can't wear
  both, so this isn't right, so he's wearing red shoes
- he's wearing a purple shirt

He's wearing a bowtie, red shoes, and a purple shirt

## Truth Tables

It can be complicated to determine if a statement like $(P \rightarrow Q) \lor
(Q \rightarrow R)$ is true, so we can use a truth table to easily read it. A
truth table contains each of the possible combinations of the propositional
variables along with truth value of the final statement.

### Example 1.3.2

| $P$ | $Q$ | $\lnot P \lor Q$ |
|---|---|---|
| T | T | T |
| T | F | F |
| F | T | T |
| F | F | T |

### Example 1.3.3

| $P$ | $Q$ | $R$ | $P \rightarrow Q \lor Q \rightarrow R$
|---|---|---|---|
| T | T | T | T |
| T | T | F | T |
| T | F | T | T |
| T | F | F | T |
| F | T | T | T |
| F | T | F | T |
| F | F | T | T |
| F | F | F | T |

This is a tautology because it is always true.

## Logical Equivalence

$\lnot P \lor Q$ is logically equivalent to $P \rightarrow Q$ because the truth
table is the same. Logically equivalent means the truth value is the same for
any truth values of their parts. This is written as $P \equiv Q$

### Example 1.3.6

The first statement can be translated to $\lnot(R \lor S)$, and the second is
$\lnot R \land \lnot S$.

Truth Table:

|  $R$  |  $S$  |  $\lnot (R \lor S)$  |  $\lnot R \land \lnot S$  |
|-----|-----|----------------|-------------------|
|  1  |  1  |       0        |         0         |
|  1  |  0  |       0        |         0         |
|  0  |  1  |       0        |         0         |
|  0  |  0  |       1        |         1         |

### De Morgan's Law

Let's us distribute a negation.

$$
\lnot (P \land Q) \equiv \lnot P \lor \lnot Q
$$

$$
\lnot (P \lor Q) \equiv \lnot P \land \lnot Q
$$

Double negations cancel each other out, such that $\lnot \not P \equiv P$

Using these rules, any negations in a molecular statement can be distributed
down to the atomic propositions.

### Example 1.3.8

$$
\lnot (P \rightarrow Q) \equiv \lnot (\lnot P \lor Q) \equiv \lnot \lnot P \land
\lnot Q \equiv P \land \lnot Q
$$

### Example 1.3.10



|  $P$  |  $Q$  |  $R$  |  $(P \lor Q) \rightarrow R$  |  $(P \rightarrow R) \lor (Q \rightarrow R)$  |
|-----|-----|-----|-----------------|------------------------|
|  1  |  1  |  1  |        1        |           1            |
|  1  |  1  |  0  |        0        |           0            |
|  1  |  0  |  1  |        1        |           1            |
|  1  |  0  |  0  |        0        |           1            |
|  0  |  1  |  1  |        1        |           1            |
|  0  |  1  |  0  |        0        |           1            |
|  0  |  0  |  1  |        1        |           1            |
|  0  |  0  |  0  |        1        |           1            |

Not logically equivalent.

## Equivalence for Quantified Statements

Sometimes the quantifiers don't change the equivalence:

$$\forall x(P(x) \rightarrow Q(x)) \equiv \forall x(\lnot P(x) \lor Q(x))$$

The claim "all odd numbers are prime" can be represented as $\forall x(O(x)
\rightarrow P(x))$ This can be proven false with just one counter example. The
counter example can be written as:

$$
\lnot \forall x(O(x) \rightarrow P(x)) \equiv \exists x (\lnot(O(x)
\rightarrow P(x)) \equiv \exists x (O(x) \land \lnot P(x))
$$

The last step is the same as we used for just propositional logic.

$$
\lnot \forall x P(x) \equiv \exists x \lnot P(x)
$$
$$
\lnot \exists x P(x) \equiv \forall x \lnot P(x)
$$

### Example 1.3.12

They are not logically equivalent because the statement on the left says that
everything must be either $P$ or $Q$ but the right says everything must be only
$P$ or only $Q$ and one thing cannot be P and the next Q, like on the left.
However the right implies the left.

### Example 1.3.13

You cannot switch the order of quantifiers because the left says that for every
x, there is a y that fulfills the condition. However, the right says that there
is one y that fulfills the condition for every x. However the right implies the
left.

## Deductions

A deduction rule is an argument that is always valid. For example the following
deduction rule is called modus ponens.

$$
P \rightarrow Q \\
P \\
\therefore Q
$$

### Example 1.3.14

| $P$ | $Q$ | $P \rightarrow Q$ | $\lnot P \rightarrow Q$ |
|---|---|---|---|
| T | T | T | T |
| T | F | F | T |
| F | T | T | T |
| F | F | T | F |

In both cases where both premises are true, $Q$ is true.

### Example 1.3.15

| $P$ | $Q$ | $R$ | $P \rightarrow R$ | $Q \rightarrow R$ | $P \lor Q$ |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| T | T | T | T | T | T |
| T | T | F | F | F | T |
| T | F | T | T | T | T |
| T | F | F | F | T | T |
| F | T | T | T | T | T |
| F | T | F | T | F | T |
| F | F | T | T | T | F |
| F | F | F | T | T | F |

This is not true because the second to last line, the 3 premises are true but
the conclusion is false.

## Quantifier Deductions

$$
\forall x P(x) \\
\therefore \exists x P(x)
$$
