# 1.4 Proofs

### Investigate

Solution

```
+-+-+-+-+
|2|3|4|1|
+-+-+-+-+
|1|4|2|3|
+-+-+-+-+
|4|1|3|2|
+-+-+-+-+
|3|2|1|4|
+-+-+-+-+
```

By putting the same number in opposite corners, it becomes impossible to fill in
the remaining squares entirely without breaking the rules of sudoku. I think
this statement is true because you already cannot place the same number in any
adjacent corners, so it makes sense that you cannot place the same number in the
other corner.

## Direct Proof

This is the simplest style of proof. It just involves going through every
statement in detail and explaining how the conclusion is true.

### Example 1.4.5

If there is a 2 in the top left square of the puzzle, then the top right square
must be a 4, because the numbers 1-3 are already used in that row, and numbers
cannot be used more than once per row in a valid puzzle. Since the numbers 1, 3,
and 4 are already used in the right most column, the last square at the bottom
must be a 2 as well.

### Example 1.4.6

Since there are only 3 empty squares there are 3 possible arrangenments they can
be in, in terms of rows. They are either all in different rows, in which case
they must be the last remaining number from 1 to 4 in that row. They can also be
all in the same row, which means they are all in different columns, in which case
they must be the last remaining number from 1 to 4 in that column. If 2 only 2
are in the same row, the square in it's own row, must take on the last remaining
number 1-4 in its row. This leaves 2 empty squares on the same row, so they must
take on the last remaining number 1-4 in its column. In all these scenarios,
there is only one solution.

### Example 1.4.7

If $n$ is even, it can be represented as $n = 2k$. Therefore, $n^2 = 2(2k^2)$
which is also an even number.

### Example 1.4.8

If $b$ is a multiple of $a$ it can be represented as $b = k_1(a)$. If $c$ is a
multiple of $b$ it can be represented as $c = k_2(b)$. If the first equation is
substituted into the second one gets $c = k_2(k_1(a))$ which shows that $c$ is a
multiple of $a$.

## Proof by Contrapositive

$P \rightarrow Q$ is logically equivalent to $\lnot Q \rightarrow \lnot P$ If
you can directly prove the contrapositive, you have also proven the original
statement.

### Example 1.4.9

If a puzzle is invalid, it cannot have a solution because it requires a valid
puzzle. Because there are zero solutions, the puzzle is not solvable.

### Example 1.4.10

If $n$ is not even, it can represented as $n = 2k + 1$ and $n^2 = (2k + 1)^2 = 4k^2 + 4k + 1 = 2(2k^2 + 2k) + 2$
which is also not even.

### Example 1.4.11

Assume $a$ is even and $b$ is even. $a = 2k$ and $b = 2j$, so $a + b = 2k + 2j = 2(k + j)$. Therefore $a + b$ is even.

### Example 1.4.12

Assume $p$ is even, which means it is divisible by 2. Because $p$ is a prime
number, and one of it's factors is 2, it's other factor must be 1. Therefore
$p = 2$

## Proof by Contradiction

By showing that assuming something to be true leads to a contradiction ($P \land \lnot P$),
one can prove that $P$ must be false.

### Example 1.4.13

Assume that the square in the top right of the puzzle doesn't contain a 3. In
order to be valid one of the middle 2 squares of the right most column must
contain a 3 for that column to have at least one 3. This would make the puzzle
invalid because there is already a 3 in each of the middle 2 rows. This means
there must be a 3 in the top right corner.

### Example 1.4.14

Assume there is a solution to the puzzle. You cannot put a four on row 1 col 2
because there is already a 4 on that row, and same for row 4 col 2. You cannot
put a 4 on row 3 col 2 because there is already something there. You also cannot
put one on row 2 col 2 because there is already a 4 in that box. There is
no where to put a 4 in the second column, so there is no solution. Which
contradicts the original assumption, proving there is no solution.

### Example 1.4.16

Assume $x^2 = 4y + 2$. $x^2 = 2(2y + 1)$ shows that $x^2$ and $x$ must be even,
and $x = 2k$. That means $4k^2=2(2y+1)$, $2k^2=2y+1$, and $y = k^2-\frac{1}{2}$.
Because $k$ is an integer, this makes $y$ not an integer.

### Example 1.4.17

Assume that if more than $n$ pigeons fly int $n$ pigeon holes then no pigeons
holes will carry more than 1 pigeon. The first $n$ pigeons will fly into all the
holes filling them all with one. There cannot be any more pigeons because all
the holes are already filled.

## Summary

To prove $P \rightarrow Q$:

|Type|Start|End|
|---|---|---|
|Directly|Assume $P$|Therefore $Q$|
|Contrapositive|Assume $\lnot Q$|Therefore $\lnot P$|
|Contradiction|Assume $\lnot (P \rightarrow Q)$|contradiction|

Using proof by contradiction to prove an implication ($P \rightarrow Q$) assumes
$P \land \lnot Q$ which is what is direct and contrapostive proofs start with.
