# 1.5 Proofs about Discrete Structures

## Proofs About Sets

A set is an unordered collection of elements that can be definied by listing all
the elements or listing a rule that all the elements must follow.

$A$ is a subset of $B$, which is written as $A \subseteq B$, if every element of
$A$ is an element of $B$. $A$ is a proper subset of $B$ ($A \subset B$) if $A$
is a subset of $B$ and there is at least one element of $B$ that is not in $A$.

### Example 1.5.2

$B$ is a proper subset of $A$ because 4 is an element of $A$ but not $B$ and all
elements of $B$ are less than 5.

This can be interpreted as the logical statement "for all numbers $n$ in
$B$, $n$ is in $A$. Which can be proven with one of the methods from 1.4.

### Proposition 1.5.3

For sets $A$, $B$, and $C$, if $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq C$ then $A \subseteq C$

### Example 1.5.4

Assume $A \subseteq B$. Therefore $A \cup B$ is equivalent to $B$ because the
union is all the elements of both $A$ and $B$ and all the elements of $A$ are
already in $B$ so the union must be just $B$. $B \subseteq B$ so $B \cup A
\subseteq B$

## Proofs about Functions

A function $f : A \rightarrow B$ is injective if every element of $B$
corresponds with one element of $A$.

The image of a set $A \subseteq X$, under a function $f: X \rightarrow Y$, is
the set of all outputs of the function for the items in $A$

### Two Line Notation

The top line contains the inputes and bottom row contains the outputs

$$
f : \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
a & b & c & d
\end{pmatrix}
$$

### Example 1.5.6

$f$ is injective and $g$ is not

### Proposition 1.5.7

if $|A| > |B|$ then the function $f : A \rightarrow B$ is not injective

The result after directly applying a theorem or proposition is called a
corollary. "If a class has 25 students, then at least 2 students share the same
birth month" is a corollary.

### Example 1.5.10

$f(A) = {2, 4, 6}$

### Proposition 1.5.11

Given a function $f : X \rightarrow Y$ and the sets $A$ and $B$ which are both
subsets of $X$, if $A \subseteq B$ then $f(A) \subseteq f(B)$

## Proofs about Relations

A relation on a set is a set of ordered pairs of elements from the set. They
describe a relationship between the elements of a set. An example of a relation
is $<$, and an element of this relation is $(3, 5)$. They can be written with
the general symbol $~$, using the letter $R$ like $R(x, y)$, $xRy$, or $(x,y) \in R$.

A relation is transitive if $xRy \land yRz \land xRz$ for all elements of the
set the relation is defined on.

### Example 1.5.13

This is not transitive because of a counter example containg three students, $a$,
$b$, and $c$. $a~b$ is true because $a$ and $b$ take physics together, and $b~c$
is true because they take history together, but $a~c$ is not true, so the
relation is not transitive.

### Example 1.5.14

Assume that $a ~ b$ and $b ~ c$. B is taller than C and A is even taller,
therefore $a ~ c$

## Proofs about Graphs

A graph is a set of vertices ($V$) and a set of edges ($E$). The edges are a 2
element set of vertices. The degree of a vertex is the number of edges
connecting to it.

### Example 1.5.16

3 2 2 1

### Investigate (from beginning)

It is not possible for all 15 people to shake exactly 3 peoples hands because
there would have to be 22.5 edges, and there cannot be half an edge. That's
because there are 15 vertices, with 3 edges each, but each edge connects to 2
vertices.

### Proposition 1.5.17

The number of vertices with odd degree must be even.
