# 1.5 Proofs about Discrete Structures

## Proofs About Sets

A set is an unordered collection of elements that can be definied by listing all
the elements or listing a rule that all the elements must follow.

$A$ is a subset of $B$, which is written as $A \subseteq B$, if every element of
$A$ is an element of $B$. $A$ is a proper subset of $B$ ($A \subset B$) if $A$
is a subset of $B$ and there is at least one element of $B$ that is not in $A$.

### Example 1.5.2

$B$ is a proper subset of $A$ because 4 is an element of $A$ but not $B$ and all
elements of $B$ are less than 5.

This can be interpreted as the logical statement "for all numbers $n$ in
$B$, $n$ is in $A$. Which can be proven with one of the methods from 1.4.

### Proposition 1.5.3

For sets $A$, $B$, and $C$, if $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq C$ then $A \subseteq C$

### Example 1.5.4

Assume $A \subseteq B$. Therefore $A \cup B$ is equivalent to $B$ because the
union is all the elements of both $A$ and $B$ and all the elements of $A$ are
already in $B$ so the union must be just $B$. $B \subseteq B$ so $B \cup A
\subseteq B$

## Proofs about Functions

A function $f : A \rightarrow B$ is injective if every element of $B$
corresponds with one element of $A$.

The image of a set $A \subseteq X$, under a function $f: X \rightarrow Y$, is
the set of all outputs of the function for the items in $A$

### Two Line Notation

The top line contains the inputes and bottom row contains the outputs

$$
f : \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3 & 4 \\
a & b & c & d
\end{pmatrix}
$$

### Example 1.5.6

$f$ is injective and $g$ is not

### Proposition 1.5.7

if $|A| > |B|$ then the function $f : A \rightarrow B$ is not injective

The result after directly applying a theorem or proposition is called a
corollary. "If a class has 25 students, then at least 2 students share the same
birth month" is a corollary.

### Example 1.5.10

$f(A) = {2, 4, 6}$

### Proposition 1.5.11

Given a function $f : X \rightarrow Y$ and the sets $A$ and $B$ which are both
subsets of $X$, if $A \subseteq B$ then $f(A) \subseteq f(B)$

## Proofs about Relations

A relation on a set is a set of ordered pairs of elements from the set. They
describe a relationship between the elements of a set. An example of a relation
is $<$, and an element of this relation is $(3, 5)$. They can be written with
the general symbol $~$, using the letter $R$ like $R(x, y)$, $xRy$, or $(x,y) \in R$.

A relation is transitive if $xRy \land yRz \land xRz$ for all elements of the
set the relation is defined on.

### Example 1.5.13

This is not transitive because of a counter example containg three students, $a$,
$b$, and $c$. $a~b$ is true because $a$ and $b$ take physics together, and $b~c$
is true because they take history together, but $a~c$ is not true, so the
relation is not transitive.

### Example 1.5.14

Assume that $a ~ b$ and $b ~ c$. B is taller than C and A is even taller,
therefore $a ~ c$

## Proofs about Graphs

A graph is a set of vertices ($V$) and a set of edges ($E$). The edges are a 2
element set of vertices. The degree of a vertex is the number of edges
connecting to it.

### Example 1.5.16

3 2 2 1

### Investigate (from beginning)

It is not possible for all 15 people to shake exactly 3 peoples hands because
there would have to be 22.5 edges, and there cannot be half an edge. That's
because there are 15 vertices, with 3 edges each, but each edge connects to 2
vertices.

### Proposition 1.5.17

The number of vertices with odd degree must be even.

# Additional Exercises

1. Assume that $A \subseteq B$. That means that every element of $A$ is also an
   element of $B$. $A \cup B$ is all the elements of $A$ and $B$, and all the
   elements of $A$ are already in $B$. Therefore $A \cup B = B$. Assume that $A
   \cup B = B$ This means that all the elements of $A$ are already in $B$,
   because $A \cup B$ contains every item from $A$ and $B$. Therefore $A
   \subseteq B$. I have proven that the implication is true both ways, so $A
   \subseteq B$ if and only if $A \cup B = B$
2. Assume that $A \subseteq B$. This means that every element of $A$ is also an
   element of $B$. $A \cap B$ is every element of $A$ that is also in $B$, and
   because every element of $A$ is also in $B$, $A \cap B = A$. Assume that $A
   \cap B = A$. $A \cap B$ means that every element of $A$ that is also an
   element of $B$. Because $A \cap B = A$, every element of $A$ must be an
   element of $B$. Therefore $A \subseteq B$. I have proven that the implication
   is true both ways, so $A \subseteq B$ if and only if $A \cap B = A$
3. Assume $A \cup B \subseteq C$. $A \cup B$ means every element of $A$ and $B$.
   Every element of $A$ is in $C$ and every element of $B$ is in $C$. Therefore
   $A \subseteq C$ and $B \subseteq C$
4. Assume that $A \subseteq C$ and $B \subseteq C$. $A \cup B$ is every item in
   $A$ and every item in $B$. Because every item of $A$ is in $C$, and every
   item in $B$ is in $C$, every item in $A \cup B$ is in $C$. Therefore $A \cup
   B \subseteq C$
5. Assume that $A \setminus B = A$. All of the elements of $A$ are not in $B$. $A \cap
   B$ is every item of $A$ that is also in $B$. Therefore $A \cap B = \emptyset$
6. Assume that $A \neq B$ and $A \setminus B = B \setminus A$. $A \setminus B$
   would be the elements of $A$ that are not in $B$ and $B \setminus A$ would be
   the elements of $B$ that are not in $A$. Because $A \neq B$, there are some
   elements in $A$ that are not in $B$, there are some elements of $B$ not in
   $A$, or both. Assume there are elements of $A$ that are not in $B$ wolog.
   This means that $A \setminus B$ is not an empty set. $B \setminus A$ can only
   be an empty set or contain the elements of $B$ that are not in $A$. The
   elements of $A$ that are not in $B$ cannot be equal to empty set or the
   elements of $B$ that are not it $A$ so this a contradiction.
7. 
    1. Let $a$ be an element of $A \cap B$ and $n$ be $f(a)$. $f(A) \cap f(B)$
       contains every image of $A$ that is also an image of $B$. $n$ is an image
       of an element in $A$ and $B$. Therefore $n$ is in $f(A) \cap f(B)$.
    2.

    $$
    f = \begin{pmatrix}
    1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 \\
    6 & 6 & 7 & 6 & 6 \\
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    $$
    A = { 1, 2, 3 }
    $$
    $$
    B = { 3, 4, 5 }
    $$
    

8.
    1. Let $a$ be any element of $A \cup B$ and $n$ be $f(a)$. $f(A) \cup f(B)$
       contains every image of the all the elements in either $A$, $B$, or both.
       $n$ is an image of an element in either $A$, $B$, or both. Therefore $b$
       is in $f(A) \cup f(B)$. 
    2. Let $n$ be an element $f(A) \cup f(B)$. $n$ is the image of an element in
       either $A$, $B$, or both. $f(A \cup B)$ contains the image of every
       element in either $A$, $B$, or both. Therefore $n$ must be in $f(A \cup
       B)$
    3. $f(A \cup B) = f(A) \cup f(B)$

9.
    1.
        1. $\{1, 2, 3\}$
        2. $\{\sqrt{2}, \sqrt{3}, \sqrt{5}, \sqrt{7}\}$
        2. $\{\sqrt{1}, \sqrt{2}, ..., \sqrt{10}\}$
    2. Let $x$ be any item in the set $C$. $f(x)$ will give all the images of
       $x$ in $Y$. $f(C)$ and $C$ are the same size because a function maps a
       value to one unique value in the codomain. The inverse image of $f(C)$ is
       all of the values of $X$ that map to $f(C)$. The values of $C$ map to
       $f(C)$ so they are included in the inverse image. Therefore $x$ is in
       $f^-1(f(C))$
    3. 

    $$
    f = \begin{pmatrix}
    1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 \\
    1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 4 \\
    \end{pmatrix}
    $$
    $$
    C = \{1, 2, 3, 4\}
    $$

    4. let $y$ be any item in the set $D$. The inverse image of $y$ gives all
       the values in $X$ that map to $y$. Mapping those values in $X$ through
       the function results in $y$. Therefore $y$ is a value in $f(f^-1(D))$ and
       $D$. Therefore $f(f^-1(D)) \subseteq D$

    5. DNE
10.
    Let $y$ be any item in $f^-1(A \cap B)$. $y$ is a value of $X$ that maps to
    a value that is in $A$ and $B$. $f^-1(A) \cap f^-1(B)$ is all items in $X$
    that map to an item in $A$ and a value in $B$ because $y$ maps to an item in
    $A$ and $B$ it must be in $f^-1(A) \cap f^-1(B)$. Let $x$ be any item in
    $f^-1(A) \cap f^-1(B)$, $x$ maps to a value in $A$ and $B$
11. 
