# Summary

CS is often referred to as being a science, an engineering discipline, or a
branch of mathmatics. While CS often incorporates ideas from those areas, it is
not any of those. The author argues that CS is a branch of philosophy. CS isn't
a science because we aren't trying to model the real world like we are in other
scientific disciplines. There are also very few scientific experiments performed
in CS. Originally computer scientists performed a lot of experiments about the
runtime speed and memory usage of code, however, this did not scale as the
number of computer models increased as each experiment was only valid on one
model. This led to the big O abstraction that related speed and memory to the
input data set. This led to a shift from measuring actual real world values to
working on theory. CS doesn't have a formal research method like the scientific
method because CS uses logic to derive results from initial assumptions like
math. This can lead to problems if those initial assumptions are not correct.
However CS is not math because there is still too much basis in the real world.
Many people form their own philosophy about the best way to develop software
(which language, OS, editor, etc.). It is important to acknowledge the
similarities between CS and philosophy in order to best practice and teach CS.
Like philosophy, many CS problems don't have a single correct answer. 

# Why did we read this?

I think we were asked to read this because it is important to understand why we
are learning about the logic and math. I think that we wouldn't have put in as
much effort to learn if we thought that this had no connection to CS. I also
think we read this because, while it is important to learn about the math side
of CS, we should keep in mind that there are still parts of CS that are based in
reality, for example, network programming. I think that if a programmer tries to
treat CS as just a science or a branch of math, they won't be as effective if
they treat CS as a philosophy.

# John Hopcroft

John Hopcroft is a former CS professor at Cornell University. He has written many
books on CS theory and algorithms. He has also won many awards; for example, the
Turing Award. He worked on topics like the theory of computation and planar
graphs.

# Robert Tarjan

Robert Tarjan is also a CS professor at Princeton University. He created many
new algorithms for dealing with networks of connected nodes. He also helped
create splay trees and Fibonacci heaps. He won the Turing Award with John
Hopcroft along with many other awards.
